KAFKA-20335: Document KIP-1271 headers-aware state stores (#21840)
apache/kafka: docs/streams/developer-guide/processor-api.md

Reviewer: Does this line need an update?

Author: updated.

  * Use [persistentVersionedKeyValueStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentVersionedKeyValueStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration\)) when you need a persistent, versioned key-(value/timestamp) store that supports put/get/delete and timestamped get operations.
  * Use [persistentWindowStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentWindowStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration,java.time.Duration,boolean\)) or [persistentTimestampedWindowStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentTimestampedWindowStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration,java.time.Duration,boolean\)) when you need a persistent timeWindowedKey-value or timeWindowedKey-(value/timestamp) store, respectively.
  * Use [persistentSessionStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentSessionStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration\)) when you need a persistent sessionWindowedKey-value store.

>   * **Headers (since 4.3, [KIP-1271](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-1271%3A+Allow+to+Store+Record+Headers+in+State+Stores)):** To persist [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) in state, use [`persistentTimestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentTimestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeaders\(java.lang.String\)) with [`timestampedKeyValueStoreBuilderWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html), [`persistentTimestampedWindowStoreWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentTimestampedWindowStoreWithHeaders\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration,java.time.Duration,boolean\)) with [`timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html), and [`persistentSessionStoreWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentSessionStoreWithHeaders\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration\)) with [`sessionStoreBuilderWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html). See [Headers in State Stores](#headers-in-state-stores) below.

Reviewer 2: one giant bullet packing 6 javadoc links + 3 supplier/builder pairs into one sentence. Hard to scan.

  * Stores its data on local disk.
  * Storage capacity: managed local state can be larger than the memory (heap space) of an application instance, but must fit into the available local disk space.
  * RocksDB settings can be fine-tuned, see [RocksDB configuration](config-streams.html#streams-developer-guide-rocksdb-config).

>   * Available [store variants](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html): timestamped key-value store, versioned key-value store, time window key-value store, session window key-value store. Header-aware variants (since 4.3) are also described below.

Reviewer: What about plain stores w/o timestampe?

`time window key-value store` -> `windowed store`
`session window key-value store` -> `session store`

Remove `(since 4.3)` reference.

  * Use [persistentVersionedKeyValueStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentVersionedKeyValueStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration\)) when you need a persistent, versioned key-(value/timestamp) store that supports put/get/delete and timestamped get operations.
  * Use [persistentWindowStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentWindowStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration,java.time.Duration,boolean\)) or [persistentTimestampedWindowStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentTimestampedWindowStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration,java.time.Duration,boolean\)) when you need a persistent timeWindowedKey-value or timeWindowedKey-(value/timestamp) store, respectively.
  * Use [persistentSessionStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentSessionStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration\)) when you need a persistent sessionWindowedKey-value store.

>   * **Headers (since 4.3, [KIP-1271](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-1271%3A+Allow+to+Store+Record+Headers+in+State+Stores)):** To persist [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) in state, use a `WithHeaders` store supplier with its matching `StoreBuilder` factory (see [Headers in State Stores](#headers-in-state-stores) below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * **Headers:** To persist [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) in state, use a `WithHeaders` store supplier with its matching `StoreBuilder` factory (see [Headers in State Stores](#headers-in-state-stores) below).
```

  * Stores its data on local disk.
  * Storage capacity: managed local state can be larger than the memory (heap space) of an application instance, but must fit into the available local disk space.
  * RocksDB settings can be fine-tuned, see [RocksDB configuration](config-streams.html#streams-developer-guide-rocksdb-config).
  * Available [store variants](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html): plain key-value store (values only — no embedded record timestamp in state), timestamped key-value store, versioned key-value store, windowed store, session store. Header-aware variants are also described below.

>   * Use [persistentKeyValueStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentKeyValueStore\(java.lang.String\)) when you need a persistent plain key-value store as above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Use [persistentKeyValueStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentKeyValueStore\(java.lang.String\)) when you need a persistent plain key-value store (no embedded record timestamp).
```

Reviewer 2: `as above` is vague.

  * Use [persistentVersionedKeyValueStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentVersionedKeyValueStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration\)) when you need a persistent, versioned key-(value/timestamp) store that supports put/get/delete and timestamped get operations.
  * Use [persistentWindowStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentWindowStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration,java.time.Duration,boolean\)) or [persistentTimestampedWindowStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentTimestampedWindowStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration,java.time.Duration,boolean\)) when you need a persistent plain windowed store or a persistent timestamped windowed store, respectively.
  * Use [persistentSessionStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentSessionStore\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration\)) when you need a persistent session store.

>   * **Headers:** To persist [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) in state, use a `WithHeaders` store supplier with its matching `StoreBuilder` factory (see [Headers in State Stores](#headers-in-state-stores) below). There are no `WithHeaders` suppliers for plain persistent key-value or plain persistent windowed stores — only persistent timestamped key-value, persistent timestamped windowed, and session `WithHeaders` suppliers exist.

Reviewer 2: `There are no WithHeaders suppliers for ...`
Please split this sentence into two short sentences.

Author: changed to 2 short sentences.

  * Use [`persistentTimestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentTimestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeaders\(java.lang.String\)) with [`timestampedKeyValueStoreBuilderWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html) when you need a persistent key-(value/timestamp) store that retains headers and supports put/get/delete and range queries.
  * Use [`persistentTimestampedWindowStoreWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentTimestampedWindowStoreWithHeaders\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration,java.time.Duration,boolean\)) with [`timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html) when you need a persistent timestamped windowed store that retains headers.

>   * Use [`persistentSessionStoreWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#persistentSessionStoreWithHeaders\(java.lang.String,java.time.Duration\)) with [`sessionStoreBuilderWithHeaders`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html) when you need a persistent session store that retains headers.

Reviewer 2: I checked the code, we have ` SessionStoreWithHeadersBuilder`.

Author: changed to SessionStoreWithHeadersBuilder

  * Stores its data in memory.
  * Storage capacity: managed local state must fit into memory (heap space) of an application instance.
  * Useful when application instances run in an environment where local disk space is either not available or local disk space is wiped in-between app instance restarts.

>   * Available [store variants](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html#inMemoryKeyValueStore-java.lang.String-): plain key-value store, timestamped key-value store, windowed store, session store.

Reviewer 2: We don't have in-memory `timestamped key-value store`.

Author: removed.

  * Use [TimestampedKeyValueStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/TimestampedKeyValueStore.html) when you need a key-(value/timestamp) store that supports put/get/delete and range queries.

>   * Use [TimestampedWindowStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/TimestampedWindowStore.html) when you need to store timestamped windowed key-(value/timestamp) pairs.

Reviewer 2: "timestamped windowed key" is misleading: the windowed key isn't timestamped, the value is. The previous wording (windowedKey-(value/timestamp)) was more precise. Please revert that adjective.

## Headers in state stores (KIP-1271)

Since Kafka 4.3, you can materialize state that includes Kafka [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) in addition to keys, values, and timestamps. This is useful when header metadata must survive stateful processing (aggregations, joins, and similar operations).

In the **Processor API**, use [`Stores`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html) factory methods whose names end with `WithHeaders`, together with the matching `*BuilderWithHeaders` builders—for example `persistentTimestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeaders` with `timestampedKeyValueStoreBuilderWithHeaders`, `persistentTimestampedWindowStoreWithHeaders` with `timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder`, and `persistentSessionStoreWithHeaders` with `sessionStoreBuilderWithHeaders`. Key-value reads use [ValueTimestampHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/ValueTimestampHeaders.html); session aggregation reads use [AggregationWithHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/AggregationWithHeaders.html).

> 

Reviewer 2: We remove `AggregationWithHeaders` in https://github.com/apache/kafka/pull/21838/

Author: Thanks — dropped the AggregationWithHeaders link/text and now point sessions at SessionStoreWithHeaders + ValueTimestampHeaders for KV/window, matching [#21838](https://github.com/apache/kafka/pull/21838).

  * For DSL operators, store data is upgraded lazily in the background.
  * No upgrade happens if you provide a custom XxxBytesStoreSupplier, but you can opt-in by implementing the [TimestampedBytesStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/TimestampedBytesStore.html) interface. In this case, the old format is retained, and Streams uses a proxy store that removes/adds timestamps on read/write.

> ## Headers in state stores (KIP-1271)

Reviewer 2: Add Kafka version as well?

Author: added the version

> ## Headers in state stores (KIP-1271)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Headers in State Stores
```

Since Kafka 4.3, you can materialize state that includes Kafka [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) in addition to keys, values, and timestamps. This is useful when header metadata must survive stateful processing (aggregations, joins, and similar operations).

> **Footprint and performance:** If you keep `dsl.store.format` at `default` and do not use headers-aware `Stores` suppliers, record headers are not persisted in state—behavior and storage remain comparable to pre-KIP-1271 DSL materializations. Headers-aware stores embed header bytes in each stored update, which grows changelog segments and local RocksDB usage and can increase write and restore I/O; impact scales with header size and update rate. Enable headers in state only when downstream logic needs that metadata.

Reviewer: This does not belong into the PAPI section of the docs

Author: removed

> In the **Processor API**, use [`Stores`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html) factory methods whose names end with `WithHeaders`, together with the matching `*WithHeadersBuilder` factory methods—for example `persistentTimestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeaders` with `timestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeadersBuilder`, `persistentTimestampedWindowStoreWithHeaders` with `timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder`, and `persistentSessionStoreWithHeaders` with `sessionStoreWithHeadersBuilder`. Key-value and window reads return [ValueTimestampHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/ValueTimestampHeaders.html). For sessions, [SessionStoreWithHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/SessionStoreWithHeaders.html) stores each aggregation together with Kafka record headers (see that interface for the session value type).

Reviewer: > In the **Processor API**

Redundant. We are in the "processor API" section of the docs.

Author: removed.

> In the **DSL**, enable the corresponding built-in stores with the `dsl.store.format` application setting; see the [configuration reference](config-streams.html) and [DSL stateful operators](dsl-api.html#stateful-transformations). Details and migration notes are in [KIP-1271](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-1271%3A+Allow+to+Store+Record+Headers+in+State+Stores).

Reviewer 2: Could `config-streams.html` benefit from anchors?

Reviewer: Same.

Author: NA as removed this part  from the PR.

  * For DSL operators, store data is upgraded lazily in the background.
  * No upgrade happens if you provide a custom XxxBytesStoreSupplier, but you can opt-in by implementing the [TimestampedBytesStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/TimestampedBytesStore.html) interface. In this case, the old format is retained, and Streams uses a proxy store that removes/adds timestamps on read/write.

> ## Headers in State Stores (Kafka 4.3+) {#headers-in-state-stores}

Reviewer 2: I think this subsection is too thin. Compare it to "Versioned Key-Value State Stores". Maybe add more here:
    - explanation of what ValueTimestampHeaders<V> actually contains (value + timestamp + Headers) or what AggregationWithHeaders<AGG> is                                                     
    - mention that only persistent (RocksDB) variants exist — there is no inMemory…
    - pointer to the upgrade-guide entry that already covers compat / perf / changelog format. 
 Right now that material lives only in upgrade-guide.md; a one-line cross-link from here would help

> Since Kafka 4.3, you can materialize state that includes Kafka [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) in addition to keys, values, and timestamps ([KIP-1271](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-1271%3A+Allow+to+Store+Record+Headers+in+State+Stores)). This is useful when header metadata must survive stateful processing (for example aggregations or joins implemented with the Processor API).

Reviewer 2: `must survive` is a bit dramatic and slightly inaccurate (it's not that headers will be lost otherwise in every case, it's that without these stores the Processor API has no way to materialize them). Suggest: "Use this when downstream processing needs access to record headers from prior input — for example, when an aggregation or join implemented with the Processor API must propagate headers to its output."

> Use [`Stores`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html) factory methods whose names end with `WithHeaders`, together with the matching `StoreBuilder` factories—for example `persistentTimestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeaders` with `timestampedKeyValueStoreBuilderWithHeaders`, `persistentTimestampedWindowStoreWithHeaders` with `timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder`, and `persistentSessionStoreWithHeaders` with `sessionStoreBuilderWithHeaders`. Key-value and window reads return [ValueTimestampHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/ValueTimestampHeaders.html). For sessions, [SessionStoreWithHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/SessionStoreWithHeaders.html) stores each aggregation together with record headers as [AggregationWithHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/AggregationWithHeaders.html).

Reviewer 2: too long sentence!

> Use [`Stores`](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/Stores.html) factory methods whose names end with `WithHeaders`, together with the matching `StoreBuilder` factories—for example `persistentTimestampedKeyValueStoreWithHeaders` with `timestampedKeyValueStoreBuilderWithHeaders`, `persistentTimestampedWindowStoreWithHeaders` with `timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder`, and `persistentSessionStoreWithHeaders` with `sessionStoreBuilderWithHeaders`. (The public method names are not parallel: key-value and session use `…BuilderWithHeaders`, while window uses `timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder`—see javadoc.) Key-value and window reads return [ValueTimestampHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/ValueTimestampHeaders.html). For sessions, [SessionStoreWithHeaders](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/SessionStoreWithHeaders.html) stores each aggregation together with record headers (see that interface for the session value type).

Reviewer: Similar question as above about the dash

Reviewer: > The public method names are not parallel: key-value and session use `…BuilderWithHeaders`, while window uses `timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder`—see javadoc.)

I think we had a bug in the code at some point about inconsistent naming, but the KIP did specify consistent names, and it was fixed in the code already --if it was not fixed yet, we should fix it.

Reviewer: > (see that interface for the session value type)

Why not link to it, similar to what we do for `ValueTimestampHeaders` ?

Author: mash works fine.  removed the inconsistency part. added the link.

Author: Docs updated to match the current shipping API. The KIP used a uniform `*WithHeadersBuilder` style, but trunk uses `*BuilderWithHeaders` for key-value/session and `timestampedWindowStoreWithHeadersBuilder` for window, so the docs reflect the implemented names.

Author: if we need to fix the naming, we can do as a separate follow up PR.

  * For DSL operators, store data is upgraded lazily in the background.
  * No upgrade happens if you provide a custom XxxBytesStoreSupplier, but you can opt-in by implementing the [TimestampedBytesStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/TimestampedBytesStore.html) interface. In this case, the old format is retained, and Streams uses a proxy store that removes/adds timestamps on read/write.

> ## Headers in State Stores (Kafka 4.3+) {#headers-in-state-stores}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Headers in State Stores {#headers-in-state-stores}
```

> Since Kafka 4.3, you can materialize state that includes Kafka [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) in addition to keys, values, and timestamps ([KIP-1271](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-1271%3A+Allow+to+Store+Record+Headers+in+State+Stores)). Use this when downstream processing needs access to record headers from prior input — for example, when an aggregation or join implemented with the Processor API must propagate headers to its output. Headerless `Stores` still persist keys, values, and timestamps as before, but they do not materialize header metadata in state; the `WithHeaders` variants do.

Reviewer: Remove version and KIP reference.

Reviewer: > Headerless `Stores` still persist keys, values, and timestamps as before, but they do not materialize header metadata in state; the `WithHeaders` variants do.

Seems this only repeats what was already said? Seems not to add value?

Author: removed.

> Only persistent, RocksDB-backed suppliers exist for header-aware stores (the `Stores` factory names start with `persistent` and end with `WithHeaders`). There are no in-memory suppliers whose names end with `WithHeaders`.

Reviewer: Yes, because we don't need `WithHeader` variations -- for in-memory stores, there is also no `Timestamped` supplier variants. Not necessary to have.

You can just use the in-memory kv-store-supplier, and pass into either builder: "plain", timestamped, or with-headers, and it will just work.

  * For DSL operators, store data is upgraded lazily in the background.
  * No upgrade happens if you provide a custom XxxBytesStoreSupplier, but you can opt-in by implementing the [TimestampedBytesStore](/{version}/javadoc/org/apache/kafka/streams/state/TimestampedBytesStore.html) interface. In this case, the old format is retained, and Streams uses a proxy store that removes/adds timestamps on read/write.

## Headers in State Stores {#headers-in-state-stores}

You can materialize Kafka [record headers](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#recordheaders) into RocksDB-backed state together with keys and values. Plain persistent key-value stores keep values without an embedded record timestamp; suppliers for timestamped key-value, windowed, or session semantics expose timestamps according to each store type. Use this when downstream processing needs access to record headers from prior input — for example, when an aggregation or join implemented with the Processor API must propagate headers to its output.

> Only persistent, RocksDB-backed suppliers exist for header-aware stores (the `Stores` factory names start with `persistent` and end with `WithHeaders`). There are no in-memory suppliers whose names end with `WithHeaders`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only persistent, RocksDB-backed suppliers exist for header-aware stores (the `Stores` factory names start with `persistent` and end with `WithHeaders`). 
```

Reviewer 2: The second sentence repeats the first. Drop it!
